Greetings, legion of MPDDP users, there is another update! With it, MPDDP has been bumped to version 2.0.1, as the configuration file format is the same, so things will keep working, but the "update" keyword no longer does anything.

> But why? I used that feature, how dare you deprive me of it!?

Well, allow me to explain…

The "update" keyword was, really, not very good. It worked by telling MPDDP to enable a silly behaviour whereby it reloaded the configuration and rules every so many minutes. This produces unnecessary disk accessing (albeit not much of that), and CPU load when querying MPD for tracks and figuring out which ones we can use (which *can* be a lot, MPDDP 2 isn't terribly efficient yet). All in all, it was a Bad Thing. But it was the only way to notice changes in configuration without restarting MPDDP 2, which is very slow depending on how many rules you have enabled.

> Depending on how many rules you have enabled? I thought it depended on how many rules you had!

Well, yes, it did. That's the second thing I have changed. MPDDP 2 will now only figure out what tracks are allowed for the allowed rules, not all of them. This speeds up starting MPDDP 2 massively. Anyway, back to signals...

...fast forward to today, when I'm skimming through wikipedia and end up on the article for POSIX signals. I then learn that **dd** prints progress information when sent SIGUSR1 (yes, I too was amazed) and a thought hit me: why can't I do the same with MPDDP 2? So, off to the Python documentation for signals I went and now MPDDP 2 has some nice new behaviour:

  * **SIGUSR1** tells MPDDP 2 to reload the configuration but not the rules.
  * **SIGUSR2** tells MPDDP 2 to reload the rules but not the configuration.

Individually, you can use them for things like changing the length of the playlist, with SIGUSR1, and editing the conditions of a rule, with SIGUSR2. Together, you can change which rules are active.

I think this is a very elegant solution. We've gone from checking continuously to see if something has happened, to waiting to be *notified* that something has happened. After editing the config file, it's only a little extra effort to send MPDDP 2 the appropriate signal(s), and you're not getting unrequired disk/CPU usage every few minutes *just in case* you changed something.
