The world is very much a proprietary system—governments and corporations make decisions behind closed doors, in meetings that don't include the general public who are involved. You could consider these like the typical magical black box of nonfree software: one thing goes in (funding, typically) and another thing comes out (laws, in the case of governments). Of course, these systems are not *completely* closed, governments have to answer to their people—to a limited extent—but they are not as open as they could, nay should, be.

What can be done about this? Not a lot, I am afraid, as the changes are too radical to implement at once. They must take place gradually, or not at all. Forcing the issue could result in dystopian chaos, whereas the desired end result is a utopia, an ideal world. My ideal world; let me tell you about it.

### The Ideal World

I am, to quote *Firefly*, going to show you an ideal world—a world without sin. A world where nations are governed by meritocracies, where everyone is an educated, enlightened citizen who cares about others, where problems such as the environment are taken care of.

#### The People

For this to work, people have to become higher beings than what they are now. We must foster a culture of education and learning, allowing everyone to become an intellectual who lives life as they see fit; contributing what they can to society as they wish, and free to pursue any intellectual desires they may have. The working class would gradually be replaced by a robotic workforce (so, alas, we also need technological advancements for this to work).

Only with a people who are enlightened and understanding of each other can this ideal world function, as human greed and other negative emotions could destroy the balance that preserves it.

#### The Society

Society would be comprised of three classes:

 * Robotic worker class: this would also include any people who wished to work. Remember, people here are free to follow their hearts' desires.
 * Enlightened middle class: the majority of the population.
 * Meritocratic-based governing class: There would be no elected officials, anybody would be able to participate in government, the entire thing being run as a meritocracy, to ensure fairness and equal opportunities for all.

The governing class would actually be composed of (human) members of the other two classes who wished to govern. All decisions would be reached by achieving 'reasonable consensus' (a large majority in a vote), and the more well-known contributors to government would naturally gather respect and followers, increasing their own personal power. However, this power would be entirely dependant on their peers, which is why an educated and enlightened society is required to prevent the destructive power of emotions.

Of course, in this society, sharing would be the norm, and perhaps even money would vanish: worker-drones would produce as much as possible, so no payment would be required there, and any inter-human transactions could use a meritocratic respect culture, similar to how the Free Software culture currently works.

#### The World

With people and society as I have outlined, the world would take care of itself. An enlightened people would see that the environment was suffering, and so simply stop doing whatever it was that caused the damage. Individuals may suffer for a while, but society as a whole would benefit. Of course, ideally, individuals wouldn't suffer at all. There really isn't much to say here.

### Conclusion

Of course, the world I have outlined here is far from possible right now, but I consider it a certainty in the future. I think it is a natural outcome of the advancement of technology and so we will, one day, live in an ideal world.
