It's been two months and twenty days since the last Arch Hurd LiveCD, and an update is definitely needed. The old LiveCD had, much to my embarrassment, a flaw in the "Install System" section that would make it impossible to install without manual intervention, and even then be a bit hit-and-miss for multi-partition set ups. In this new LiveCD, all known bugs have been eradicated, packages have been updated, and the whole thing just works better.

### Changelog

Updated installation packages
: the livecd now features packages current as of today, 2010-08-25, and so less needs to be updated after installing.

Updated LiveCD packages
: the packages on the livecd itself have been updated, and as a result has become much more stable. This is most likely due to the recent GNU Mach / Hurd / glibc updates by Matthias. melpo, you rock.

Updated and new documentation
: the installation guide has been updated a little over the past few months, and so the latest version of that is on the livecd. Additionally, the livecd now features an introduction to translators written by Arne Babenhauserheide.

Updated /arch/setup
: this fixes all known bugs with the old setup script, I've tested it with a variety of different set ups, and it seems to work pretty well.

Updated initscripts
: In addition to all the changes melpo has made to the initscripts in the past two months, there has been a small change from how the old livecd used to work. In the old livecd, there was a 32MB ext2 image which was mounted in RAM and used as a temporary filesystem. Now, a temporary ext2 filesystem is created on the fly at boot; this enables the ISO to be just a little bit smaller.
