I have decided, after months of no development, to officially call an end to my Erasmus kernel project. I dived into the project with no aims or goals other than a vague sense of wanting to make something good. Later I thought up targets so I could use version numbers, but a plan from the beginning was needed, really. So, no more Erasmus until I have a good plan first. I *do* intend to start up Erasmus again one day, though when I do it'll be more-or-less a complete rewrite of the current version as, currently, large chunks of it are code copied from elsewhere which I don't really understand. Which, obviously, causes problems. Perhaps I'll meet someone interested in OS development at University and we'll start up the project again together; having had another person, if only to bounce ideas off, would also have helped me.

In summary, when I started the project I was a mediocre C programmer and pretty rubbish at ASM. I didn't understand many of the concepts I was working with, and so it's a miracle it got as far as it did.

*But that will change!* One day, perhaps as a microkernel (I like the way the Hurd does things), perhaps as a monolithic kernel, a hybrid, or something else entirely, Erasmus will return! I realise now that saying things like "By version 0.3 I'll have a port of zsh" was a silly, limiting thing to do. I should focus on making a good kernel, and see where I go from there, rather than focus on writing something which can run a particular Linux app.

Watch this space...
