As the dust from the General Election of May 2010 settles, you may remember or be reminded of a little party that got some coverage on the BBC and a few other places, with the odd name of the Pirate Party. Now, what is this Pirate Party, and, more importantly, why should you vote for them in the next election? The Pirate Party isn't just a UK thing, oh no, it is a part of the larger Pirate Party movement worldwide, all sparked off by some people in Sweden back in 2005 looking at the way the world is and saying "This isn't right!" To explain what the PPUK (Pirate Party of the United Kingdom) is, I need to explain what the Pirate Party idea is about.

Piratpartiet (the Swedish and the original Pirate Party) has a few key principles:

 * Promoting global legislation to facilitate the emerging information society.
 * We claim that today’s copyright system is unbalanced.
 * Privatised monopolies are one of society's worst enemies.
 * All attempts to curtail these rights (e.g. privacy) must be questioned and met with powerful opposition.

So, what do these mean? The first is obvious; the world needs to keep up with, and aid the emergence of, new technology. The world of technology is progressing so fast that if you fall behind, you have a high chance of staying behind. The second refers to how the (mainly entertainment) industries use copyright legislation to exert control and dominance over today's users. Remember when home taping was killing the music industry? Or VHS would be the death of the film industry? It's like that, but much worse. Even when no money changes hands, individuals can be criminalised and prosecuted for sharing files, the Piratpartiet believes that non-commercial file sharing should be decriminalised. The third is a little more cryptic, but can be easily understood if you know it refers to patents. The patent system was, in my opinion, a great idea --- someone can build an amazing contraption, and then have sole right to do with it as they wish until the patent expires and the process or device passes into the public domain. However, the patent system was never intended for software, and is misused for drugs, it simply doesn't work. Software patents severely harm the software industry (as can be seen by the sheer number of lawsuits traded back and forth constantly), and drug patents drive up the cost of medical treatment, leaving hospitals with less funding for other things. Piratpartiet believes, as I do, that the patent system is old, and no longer applicable to the current world. It should be abolished. The final policy is concerning something I'm sure we can all agree with, privacy is seriously being eroded. The UK is the most watched country in the world, with more CCTV cameras per person than anywhere else. Anti-terror laws and their ilk allow the authorities to avoid due process where it is convenient and punish if not detain people for the most trivial of things, such as taking a photograph, or putting something in a bin. Clearly, there is something wrong with the world when most people are simply apathetic to this situation.

The PPUK was founded last year, with much the same aims as the Piratpartiet. Their policies cover three main areas

 * Copyright and Patents
 * Privacy
 * Freedom of Speech

If none of those issues bother you; if you didn't feel anything was important in the paragraph about Piratpartiet's policies; if you think things are fine the way they are now, then you may as well stop reading at this point. If not, if you do care, you should consider reading. You might be a Pirate without knowing it.

### Copyright and Patents

Did you know that you don't currently have the right to format or time shift, or share files under UK copyright law? I assume you knew about file sharing, but relatively few people know about format and time shifting. What are they, exactly? Well:

 * **Format shift** convert media to another format; *exempli gratia* copy a CD to your portable media player, such as an iPod.
 * **Time shift** record media from TV (or something similar) and watch later.

So, let's look at a fairly common scenario: you have just gone shopping and come back with some CDs, perhaps even a DVD or two. The first thing you want to do with your CDs is copy them to your media player so you can listen to them without carrying around a computer or CD player with you but, guess what, you can't! You bought a copy of that music on a CD, not a digital copy on a computer. As such, it's illegal to copy the music from the CD to your computer, and then on to your media player. The story is the same for the DVDs, though there it is a little more silly. It is illegal to break the encryption 'protecting' the DVDs, and illegal to watch a DVD on any unauthorised player. So you can't copy the DVDs to your computer, and, even more ridiculous, it's even illegal to watch the DVDs in, say, Linux! This is because Linux media players generally, being free and open source software developed by a team of volunteers, don't have the money or even inclination to pay expensive license fees. Madness.

If you thought the last example was insane enough, you haven't heard the last of it. Did you know that you currently get taxed on any blank media, such as rewritable CDs, that you buy? This is to pay off the entertainment industry, assuming that all blank media is used to copy material illegally. That's criminalising everyone who buys blank media. As someone who has a stack of Linux LiveCDs, I have to wonder how much money I would have saved over the years were there no blank media taxes -- probably not much, but it's the principle of the thing.

Hopefully you are now beginning to see that our copyright system is a little broken. Originally, copyright lasted for 14 years. Now it's life + 70 years --- I do not know of any 69-year-dead artist who suffers from me using his work without paying.

As one final point, consider the BBC. It is funded by license fees, so you would assume that the content produced belongs to the license owners, right? Wrong. You would know this if you've ever tried to download anything from BBC iPlayer --- the content is filled with Digital Restrictions Management (DRM), and renders itself unwatchable after a set time limit. The PPUK means to introduce government 'health-warnings' on products which include DRM, clearly indicating to a customer that their functionality has been crippled, and to require the BBC to release all of their content under a Creative Commons license in DRM-free formats.

### Privacy

The UK is, scarily enough, the most heavily-monitored country in the world. We have more CCTV cameras than anywhere else which is, I and many others think, a problem. Whilst CCTV cameras have their advantages --- I am not disputing that --- I think it has gone too far when almost everything you do on a day out will be recorded. Just think if someone was following you, and had that kind of power, you would be completely at their mercy. The PPUK wishes to implement laws on the acceptable use of CCTV, including a database maintained by the Information Commissioner available to the public listing the locations of cameras and owner contact details.

Many people have an apathetic view, that if you have nothing to hide, the cameras aren't a problem. The belief that most people in this country seem to have is that, unless you have something to hide, others should be allowed to monitor, follow, and record you. I don't agree with that, I believe that only if you do have something to hide should that be appropriate.

### Freedom of Speech

The PPUK's freedom of speech policies are very technology-orientated, which is appropriate in this increasingly technological world. Their policies cover, I think, four main areas so I have broken down this section. Of course, I highly doubt the PPUK considers it like this, but this is my impression after reading the manifesto. These areas are:

 * Technology
 * Education
 * Culture

The PPUK supports net neutrality, and opposes any government measures to censor the Internet, except in the most extreme of cases such as national security. I'm not sure how often Internet censorship can help with national security, so I don't forsee much censorship going on. They also intend to solve the problem with ISPs offering speeds of "up to x Mbps", and customers only getting a fraction of that. This will be done by only allowing ISPs to charge for the fraction of the speed that the customers actually receive, so it will be in their interest to provide as high-speed Internet access as they can.

The state of computer education in schools is, speaking as an A level ICT student and an AS computing student, rather pitiful. Computing isn't too bad, but in ICT you get taught to use Microsoft Office and not much else, everything else is theory. Computing education should teach not specific software packages, but ideas and ways of doing things. Unless this is done, we are raising generations of Microsoft-dependent users who will find it very difficult to switch to something else if need be. The PPUK believe that school should make more use of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS), so that pupils are not dependent on buying a proprietary from some business in their later lives. Speaking as a FOSS user and contributor, and a GNU webmaster, I heartily support this viewpoint. The PPUK also believe that pupils should be taught about how computers work, with programming classes for interested pupils. I also agree with this, many people are willing to, say, have more than a passing knowledge of how their car works, but there seems to be a societal stigma against having anything more than a very vague knowledge of computers, branding people who have such knowledge "nerds", "geeks", and generally turning them into social outcasts. What is so loathsome about computer knowledge?

Our culture and society is becoming increasingly locked-down and controlled by corporations who can afford it, however that is only one aspect of the culture problem we have today. The PPUK pledges to promote the inclusion of accessibility features in media, such as subtitles and audio descriptions to make content more accessible to disabled people, a group who suffer on the current unclear government position on broadcast material and material available online. However, the culture problem runs deeper than mere accessibility. Amazing things which we should all be able to enjoy are frequently locked away in libraries and museums, who often also have the only copy of that whatever-it-is. This is wrong, such material should be available in digital form, if nothing else, and should be available online. Finally, anti-terror laws are used inappropriately to control people. Gone are the days when you could, say, take a photo of a bridge or important building without being accused of terrorism. Such cultural relics should be available for everyone to record if they so desire, and as such the PPUK promise to correct the misuse of anti-terror laws.

### Why Pirate?

So, why should you go Pirate? If you are offended by the injustice of current copyright and patent law; if you do not want to be watched and recorded for most of your time outside; if you want to receive fair treatment online and see our culture flourish in the web medium, then there if a good chance you are a pirate. Have a look at their website, http://www.pirateparty.org.uk, for more information.
